hi friends
In this video we are going to discuss about memory
leak and the function free.
So in the previous lessons we have learned that we can
allocate memory dynamically using malloc and calloc and
we get the memory located in the heap section and
then we use it now after our use
What happens if we do not deallocate it? In that
case the allocated memory will reside there forever which cannot
be used by other processes.
So if we do not deallocate the memory then
it will reduce the amount of available memory and reduces
the system performance.
This condition is known as memory leak
Let's assume the total available memory in heap as K
bytes
Now if we allocate N bytes of memory dynamically it
will consume N bytes from the heap section
Now suppose N bytes of memory is allocated M times so
a total of M x N bytes will be used
from the heap section and at some point of time
M x N can exceed K
That is the whole heap
Memory will be consumed by the program and now there
is no more available memory which will result in system
crash. For an example consider this piece of code here
we're allocating four bytes of memory dynamically and it is
inside while(true) So it will run infinite times
That is it is allocating four bytes for infinite
number of times
So at a point of time heap will definitely run
out of available memory which will result in system crash
or system shutdown.
So that is memory leak
And what is the solution to this problem? For that
we have an inbuilt function called free which will
deallocate the memory which we allocated
There is only one argument for the function free which
is the pointer to the memory block which we need to
deallocate.
Now to understand the working of this function, consider this
piece of code here. Firstly we are creating an integer pointer
ptr and next we have a dynamic memory allocation
statement. Hope now you all know how malloc and
calloc works
So using this line of code we are dynamically allocating
5 x 4 bytes using malloc.
So a total of 20 bytes and its base address
is returned to ptr.
Now we are adding values 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50
to these five blocks.
Once we are done with the allocated memory we should
deallocate it. Otherwise memory leak will occur
so use function free by passing pointer to the memory block
We need to deallocate
so write free(ptr) which will deallocate
the memory pointed by ptr
So it is again made available and after program executes
the heap section will regain its original available size
Now what happens if we call free again by passing the
same pointer? Then the behaviour is undefined. So that's all and thank you for watching this video.